hey folks see Eric Metaxas show we've
got great music but we've got even
better guests and stories I cannot I
don't know where to begin I'm sitting
here in the studio with the author of a
book called deep undercover my secret
life entangled allegiances as a KGB spy
in America the story sounds unbelievable
it sounds like fiction it is an utterly
true story I'm sitting here with the
author and the man who has lived the
story Jack Barsky
Jack welcome no thanks for having me I
your story is truly unbelievable and I
had you on this program two and a half
or so years ago I wanted to to have you
back in this beautiful studio to tell
the story to a new audience your story
has several happy endings to it so as
dark as it gets
it ends up really really beautifully but
I let's just go back to the beginning
the title says my secret life entangle
allegiances as a KGB spy in America tell
us the first part of the story how did
you get to be a K G B spy yeah well
that's not something one could aspire to
Eve I also never thought as growing up
that I was going to be a policeman an
agent or in the army I had no clue what
to do I you you grew up in what was the
Germany yes which Soviet occupied East
Germany Germany our German Democratic
Republic we and I grew up in a rather
backward area there wasn't much there
but the the one thing that was good
about East Germany the education was
excellent was all state education and
and we were drilled and I worked my way
out of this backward area step by step
to university and at when I was at
university I studied chemistry where
were you in you know that was in the
town or ena ena in internet' upon
leipzig I know this area I have to
from my audience in case anybody's
missing this because I'm all atwitter
here my mother grew up in this area so
my family is from the Ozona which of
course they've been there long before it
was the us zona but I've been there so
many times and those people are my
people - Amelia you know we go there any
opportunity we get so when I first heard
your story I said wow this is amazing
this is a man who grew up in this area
that I know but you really went over to
the dark side you didn't choose the path
so let's let's say you grew up you went
you just said you became you you were
studying in the university studying
chemistry with no ambition to go into
being a spy for the KGB the ambition
that at that point because I I was an A
student I pretty much a stew everything
my ambition was to become a tenured
professor and I was already on a on a
path that that would have succeeded
pretty now if you had become a tenured
professor evening United States you
would be a communist so the only thing
that saved you was becoming a KGB agent
okay so you you want to become a tenured
professor your ambitions are in
chemistry and in the Academy so what
Rendon's well one day I was in my third
year of study I'm sitting in my dorm
room
on a Saturday doing some work
my roommate wasn't there and there's a
knock on the door and excuse me this is
in the 70s yes it was around 74 I
believe okay 70s we um knock on the door
that knock was odd to begin with because
the the custom was for our students when
when we visit each other to knock and
come in there was a knock and nobody
came in so I knew there was somebody who
didn't who didn't belong on a Saturday
we usually didn't have people come visit
unless they were girlfriends and that
was sort of you not quite legal anyway
so anyway so I said come on in and in
comes a man I
I had never seen a no and he was German
and he introduced himself very quickly
as a representative of cows I see Anna
which is still in existence it's an
optics company of international repute
yes ice right of course yeah and he said
he wants he wanted to talk with me about
my plans after graduation
bing-bing-bing-bing what an idiot I'm
sorry I don't know he he was operating
on behalf of the KGB and and and and
used a cover story that was not credible
because in those days when you graduated
from college unless you were at the very
top but that means you probably would
have decided to stay there everybody was
assigned someplace and this guy wanted
as if he was gonna recruit me I know
already something was up but Americans
it's interesting because we would never
even think about this that you're in a
system that's so oppressive that you
don't eat you're not even given a choice
where to work that is they just send you
here or send you there that is
fundamentally it was fundamentally
correct with the exception of the
superstars and I you know I'm not
bragging I was I was a superstar so I
sort of had my choice I was actually
also recruited by the party organization
and by the youth organization too at one
point they wanted me to run the Youth
Organization for the entire University
and so I had three things that I factor
and then came to KGB but why would it be
so strange in fact if in if
representative of zeiss comes to you
knowing that you're at the top to say i
want to talk to you about no it wasn't
it wasn't done and this would not have
been a plum job right to be you know you
know if you come out of academia
you know you steeped in that you want to
do more research you want to do
something like important not be an
industrial chemist right so that didn't
okay so the guy knocks on your door in
1973-74 what do you what what's the
conversation so I knew something was up
and my my first thought was he's
probably
the East German secret police were you
scared no not at all I have nothing I
was a party member in good standing I
had nothing to be afraid of my family
was quote unquote clean we didn't have
any relatives in the West
so I know he was probably going to go
along the path of recruitment of some
kind
you know the Stasi also operated with a
lot of unofficial you know contributors
so to speak yeah so you know I'm I
already this conversation is already
favorite and in my favor I know who I
thought you know I know who he was and
he he was you know just trying to figure
out how to talk to me and get what he
wanted so you know we did a lot of small
talk and then eventually he started you
know zeroing in on this thing and and he
changed his tune he said you know I have
to be honest I'm really not from called
sighs I'm from the government so you
know my thought was you know I could
really make him uncomfortable by asking
what part of the government
so with this okay I let it go I said
okay and then he asked me the question
that he that one question he came for
could I envision myself working for the
government one after Grad you graduation
at that time I was still a student and I
gave him the answer that he was looking
for without us ever saying what it was I
said yeah but not as a chemist so he
knew he knew that I knew so he had me
add me on the on the hook and so we
decided to meet again that next time
wasn't a restaurant the best restaurant
in town
I got a nice free meal out of it do you
want me to go on what happened at that
meeting I I think you've said enough
I think we're here to hear your story
now from what we have to say by the way
before you do tell it what happened
I mean you end up of course joining the
KGB and then being planted as a spy in
the United States this is what makes
your story absolutely crazy and amazing
that there were KGB spies working here
you were one of them and now you're
sitting here you have a different story
but so let's go back to that to the
meeting he takes you to a restaurant
what's next all right so so we we I
don't know maybe it was 3:00 in the
afternoon
because in Germany you eat your big meal
sometime yeah in the middle of the day
yeah so we had a we had agreed to meet
that at a certain time I entered the
restaurant and I see the fellow at the
table and it was another guy sitting at
the table now that is not unusual in
those days in Germany people would share
tables strangers are not so I didn't
know should I approach him or not so I'm
going very careful but he steps up to me
and says you know it's all right
and he introduces the fellow next to him
and now I forgot his name but he was a
Russian name oh this this is a Russian
oh it was not a Russian name he says
this is Herman we are working with our
Soviet friends Herman is the German
that's that's a Russian boy yeah Mon
yeah humming yeah that's what he called
it Hamlin we are working with our Soviet
friends now hang on a second folks this
is a story
you cannot MIT you you won't believe
this we'll be right back talking to Jack
Barsky the book is deep undercover my
secret life entangle allegiances as a
KGB spy in America see Eric Metaxas show
once
[Music]
and if folks I'm talking to Jack Barsky
not his real name or is it his real name
Jack Barsky now it is your real name
isn't it it is my legal name but you
grew up as I D take very well said
Danka say oh well it really it's amazing
that you have lived this life and you
know as I said I have relatives who
lived today in what was the former East
Germany and all my German relatives
almost are there but you were getting to
this exciting part in the story now so
you are sitting down in this restaurant
with a member of the KGB and he doesn't
reveal himself but then he says we're
working with our Russian friends of
course East Germany in those days was
effectively you know a Russian satellite
there's no question about a part of the
Soviet Union's empire evil empire in the
words of Reagan so what happens you sit
down and you know when he says we're
working with him on this friend from
Russia you know this is something's
going on well the little German and he
was a short guy that then said goodbye
and you know there was no choice or
nothing he just disappeared I never knew
his name he never had he had never
introduced himself even with the first
name you know what it's about time jack
how was that guy that was you don't
remember well you know member no
actually you're much better-looking than
it oh well I don't want to know about
that okay so you now you're alone you're
sitting here with a Russian guy right
what happened very nice fellow yeah and
he spoke German quite well and you know
this was a very very slow getting to
know one another
what they were looking at me from the
beginning
was getting me trained and launching me
as an agent as an undercover agent
initially in West Germany so those kinds
of people you really have to get to know
you need to know whether you can trust
them are they capable of doing this and
and and it's a it's a two-way street the
prospective agent also need
to be comfortable with that task you
don't force somebody into that a you can
force spying by you know blackmailing
and and bribery for somebody who orally
has secrets but it's an agent who goes
into a you know and behind enemy
territory needs to do this voluntarily
so the I worked with this fellow for a
year and a half and there was some he
gave me some some training tasks and we
talked a lot we became really good
friends I liked him a lot
he liked me too what was his name was
Herman yeah at one point I made a made a
mistake I asked him is he a real name
get him on and he looked he was angry
with me for that because I must that was
a no-no question you know it was old
secret but anyway he liked me well
enough and I I guarantee you we met once
every week on sometimes every other week
every time we met he wrote a report and
it became a big fire I mean this is
exactly like out of a movie
and somebody you're probably talking to
people about rights to your book I sold
them you sold the rights yes okay to do
a series not a movie to do even better
oh gosh well that's exciting well I
gotta say that I just want you to keep
talking so please continue with the
story so and as I said he liked me well
enough eventually he set me up before
meeting with headquarters and that was
headquarters in Berlin that was my very
first secret meeting so he I had I was
given an address and a time and a
location where I would meet another
agent that was another Russian so and we
I don't know what the there were code
words that we exchanged so - so we know
we were both who we thought we were yeah
and he took me into headquarters you
know that is a place where normally
Germans who had no access that's where
there was headquarters of the the Soviet
administration including the KGB what
part of Berlin are we talking ballon
cults host yeah it's a it's a it's the
building still stands
the typical sure it's ugly greenish yes
greenish Craig pretty ugly yeah like a
monster yeah so and and we we are
received there in an office that was
decorated with you know Lenin pictures
and in a bust of the founder of the KGB
what's his name the Polish guy I judge
in ski in ski ok and another short like
unimportant looking man sat behind a
desk the moment he opened his mouth you
know that he was not an unimportant man
you know was a voice I steel came out of
in very high authority and he spoke only
Russian now my Russian was sort of my
school Russian was good enough to
understand most of what he was saying
there was a lot of you know initial
propaganda now why we're doing this and
who the enemy is and all that nonsense
and then he switched gears like out of
the blue he looked at me and he says so
are you in or not and not with a smile
and I wasn't prepared for that question
I didn't know what that it was coming so
I was just trying to play for time I
wasn't ready to answer ah so I said well
you know I'm not really well-trained I
got to learn this I got to learn that
and he said don't worry about it we'll
train you I want an answer and I want an
answer by tomorrow at noon Wow
that made for a sleepless night because
it was not an easy decision you know on
the one hand you know I my janna had
become my hometown I loved it there i I
played basketball on the university team
I had friends and and I had this career
and I was I was already somebody and I
would have to say goodbye to all this
forever forever pretty much and start
over again it's not it's not yeah we're
gonna go to another break I'm talking to
Jack Barsky sort of his real name the
book is deep undercover it's the Eric
Metaxas show
hey I'm talking to a former KGB spy so
let's turn the music down seriously jack
your story is unbelievable let's
continue now you are you're spending a
sleepless night because you have been
asked by this tough guy this Soviets
apparatchik right are you in or out
that's a big life-changing question to
answer
huge absolutely huge and I didn't know
the extent of it but I knew that I would
have to pretty much drop everything that
I had become including all the
relationships including you know telling
my mother a big lie about where I was
going
and on the other side there was this
opportunity and I you you you mentioned
that I joined the dark side to me it was
the light side it right it was it was
helping the Soviet Union yeah and us to
liberate the enslaved working classes
and create Nirvana on the planet yeah I
still believed in that 100% yeah and
then there was two other things that
appealed to me personally first of all
there's a very famous British agent who
was once asked he kim Philby I was just
gonna say is it Kim Philby can forgive
too many agents kim Philby he was once
asked why he joined the KGB and and his
answer was if you're asked by an elite
organization to join you don't think
very long about it so I felt very
special and the Germans have something
that is kind of sort of that doesn't
have a good translation in English
called wanderlust we like to travel and
I knew I would be able to go to places
that I met more close to us in America
we call it cabin fever that's not true
the joy of wandering around oh yeah no
it's so yeah it must have been very
appealing very flattering
but the idea that you have to lie to
your own mother about who you are what
you're doing that's a price to pay yeah
but you know the rationalization was I
was doing it for a cause and you got to
understand yeah in in East Germany and
also in the Soviet Union in the Eastern
camp though there was a mystique that
was built about folks like us
agents yeah who would sacrifice a lot
yeah for the cause sure that was in
literature and in the movies and
sometimes in the newspapers
and I was gonna be one of them right
though that was enough of a reason yet
to lie yeah so it's a big step but it
sounds like you knew what you wanted to
do it's interesting that they asked you
you know you have to know by tomorrow
that's interesting I think there was
that was good
there was good thinking behind it yeah
if I hesitate any any longer I'm not a
good candidate right right okay so what
happens well I said yes my the the
fellow who kept in contact with me while
in Berlin
Boris you know we met literally named
Boris yeah well he names are meaningless
you know people introduce themselves I'm
so-and-so yeah yeah everybody knows
that's not your real name okay my my
cover name was DITA yeah and I
introduced myself to all the other KGB
folks that I met as that's interesting
my cover name is also detailed okay
so let's let's continue so you say yes
what happens I tell I tell Boris yes and
so now we were working on my departure
from you know because I was already an
employee at the University I was in my
second year as an assistant professor
working on a doctor on my doctorate
right and so now I had to quit and it
was like and I had to quit in such a way
that people wouldn't like whisper people
whispered probably anyway but the cover
initially was I was going to go to
Berlin to work for the State Department
all right and I had to on my way out I
had to
over my party book and the fellow who
received it the party official of the
University said he sort of no he said
you know there's some excuse me this
fellow said there's some people that we
don't hear from anymore but we
appreciate you this guy know he kind of
knew he guessed it yes Wow
you know that the party book was like
almost like a something considered holy
you have to keep it safe and you know
this it was part of you the party book I
mean we don't know what that is well
there's a little booklet with your name
and and then they make the entries when
you when you pay your dues and all that
Oh interesting
to be it to be a member in good standing
of the Communist Party that's correct
like like but Bernie Sanders I mean his
book well you know what actually I don't
want to get political so we're gonna
move on ok so you then you moved to
Berlin I did and and so I packed my bag
and I had one suitcase and another you
know the bag and I get on a train and I
now have another secret meeting this guy
this time with the the fellow who would
actually be with me throughout my
training in Berlin his name was Leonid
Leonid as in Brezhnev yeah yeah
impressive was the the head of the the
Soviet Union at this time he was so
another one of those meetings at a
street corner him then he takes me to
his car and now I'm hoping he's gonna
take me to an apartment right because I
had lived in the yen I had lived in a in
a dorm yeah with roommates or in a
really really small place where with
shared toilets and bathrooms yeah I was
gonna get an apartment right yeah
because you know I'm working for the KGB
or so what he said a right off the bat
is that your very first task is to find
yourself a place to live my heart went
from here to there because there were no
places
there was a severe shortage housing
shortage and all housing was controlled
by the government so you couldn't just
so that was here's the thing there was
my first task I could have failed at
that one and they would have kicked me
out find an apartment in the place
London East Berlin it's kind of funny
because one of the reasons I wanted to
have you on is I want people to know
what communism is because there are many
young people today have no idea I mean
my mother and father taught me growing
up over and over and over what it is to
live in a place that's not free it's
hell that but most people in America
have no idea so it's interesting to hear
your point of view we're gonna be right
back we're talking to Jack Barsky the
book is deep undercover it's the Eric
Metaxas show hey folks this here equity
taxes show and I'm talking to a former
KGB spy Jack Barsky your story just gets
crazier and crazier we're just at the
beginning so what happens at this point
you looking for an apartment I'm looking
for a place to live I mean and then you
as I said there's no there's no place
you can go and say well there was
nothing available so I it's almost like
you know going to a city the strange
city like in action and then you'll find
your way yeah so I figured the further
away from the center of Berlin you go
the more of a chance you might have so I
took the train and I didn't know Berlin
I took the train to one of the final
stops I walked around there and I
started asking people well this is what
you do you know you you you you
improvise and one one said maybe going
to ask over there I asked over there I
asked over there eventually I get to a
point where I talked to an elderly woman
who had a lot of teeth missing and she
says yeah I can okay I have something
that something was an outbuilding that
had a stove a bed and a chair and
running cold water I took it you took it
I took it and I lived in that place for
about six months
welcome
to Bernie Sanders America okay so we
just have a couple of minutes left in
this hour we're gonna continue with your
story after this but okay so you are now
living there
you can't take a hot shower but you are
a KGB agent right in Berlin in training
what happens in training so now I get
now I get training first of all the very
first thing that I had to do was read
the history of the Communist Party of
the Soviet Union is about this thick
interesting thing because I'm now
getting the real history of if the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union we
there was so much whitewashing as just a
totally amazing right but that was a
requirement the training other than that
was I oh I was told every agent that
we're sending needs to learn one other
language so I picked English oh sweet
yep we wouldn't be sitting here if you
hadn't picked things absolutely okay
this is pretty amazing all right so you
picking let's take English so and I
start I I had school English but I
pretty much learned it from scratch with
a tutor they paid for it yeah then there
was the operational training you know
how to conduct meetings surveillance
detection they called deaddrop
operations I don't know if him you know
what that means it's a I'm a spy I know
about this alright so maybe we can do
one of those yeah Morse code yeah
decryption and encryption secret writing
microdots
you went to spy school yeah but it was
all one on one there was yeah but I'm
just saying you're learning absolutely
yes how to be a spy and the fact is I
mean we have to remember this was at the
height of the Cold War you were on that
side we Americans were on this side and
you were learning how to do battle with
the enemy which is like a free West
correct and you believed you were you
believed in it you were a soldier who
believed in his mission so we're gonna
go to a break this is the end of part 1
with Jack Barsky Jack it's wonderful to
have you here and to hear this story
when we come back
we're gonna hear the rest of the story
folks you ain't heard nothing yet but
trust me a crazy amazing story behind
enemy lines in the United States of
America it gets crazier and crazier it's
the Eric Metaxas show our website
Metaxas talk.com stick around
[Music]
to show if the plural of octopus is
octopi in the plural of hippopotamuses
hippopotami what's the plural of Metaxas
Mattacks i Mattacks a or maybe metaxas
is is sprung a leak
anyway I'm just glad there's only one of
them and here he is Eric Metaxas I am
sitting here to continue my conversation
with Jack Barsky absolutely fascinating
story the title the book is deep
undercover my secret life entangled
allegiances as a KGB spy in America we
haven't gotten to that really crazy part
of the story yet
Jack Barsky we were talking about your
training as a KGB agent you're in Berlin
they're giving you all these assignments
and so on and so forth and you study
English you chew English at what point
do you do they realize that they may
want to use you I mean because I still
cannot believe that they sent you as a
bonafide KGB spy to live in America
among us this is a guy and pretend to
have been born here you know that that
is really so let's go back so right so a
KGB agent in training yes last left off
yeah and I study English like a maniac I
threw myself into this and I didn't know
it then but I know now I have talent to
the language yes yes yes and so about a
year into this study with a couple of
successively more demanding tutors I was
already reading English literature
fluently we had a visitor from Moscow
one day and he would ask me so how's
your English and this I showed him a
book I read this no problem is a hall
cut a tape so I cut a tape they sent it
to Moscow what do you mean kind of tape
the tape of you speaking English me
speaking English say something make make
a tape no 10 minutes talk about whatever
and they flew me to Moscow and I was
interviewed by a
born American somebody who had emigrated
to Moscow that's a priority
be honest what was it Bernie Sanders be
honest because this program was his wife
okay
so Britt you know that Bernie Sanders
did his his honeymoon yes in Soviet
Moscow oh no that's not a joke yeah I
know that and but I think it may have
been after my time yeah it was after
your time it wasn't in 82 so anyway you
came here he went there was a trade
right but seriously you you spoke
English so well that they knew we can
use you in some way they thought it
might be worth trying at the time I was
pretty good and they they figured there
was the American lady and there was also
a college professor and they had a
powwow and eventually said let's give it
a try so now when you say there was an
it was an American woman yeah now what
is an American woman doing in Moscow
working for the Soviets what's the scene
she was married to a Russian most likely
she fell in love with the KGB kind and
thought she would follow him into the
Promised Land the poor woman was
miserable she was did not have a good
life and yeah he was she was back
guarantee you're homesick anyway
she became my tutor I moved to Moscow I
met her twice a week for two years I
also had the opportunity to work with
two Americans who spied in the 40s and
early 50s they were part of the
Rosenberg Network Holly atomic spies
Morrison Lana Cohen and so I had a lot
of opportunity to speak to improve my my
English end and every night before going
to bed I did phonetics exercises boring
as hell it's a half hour you listen to a
word you repeat it you listen you repeat
I got to a point where I can still hear
my accent
but for New York it was good enough and
particularly since my birth certificate
says my mother's name was Schwartz so
the the cover story was that you know I
spoke German growing up and grow up
bilingual right and you know something
your your accident I mean I have
relatives you know who write up in
America and they have a little if you
grow up speaking German you do have you
can you can hear something in the
background okay so that's your gonna be
your cover story I hear my own accent
yeah in recording yeah sure so what
happens well so after all together five
years and you know a practice run I was
spent three months in Canada just
getting to know what it's like to live
in jr. United States were they sent you
to Canada yeah well prepare you right
and eventually it was it was launched
I'm a resident agent in Washington DC
had found they this was typical for the
operations that this is how they stole
our identities they would want one
around in graveyards and look for
gravestones of children who died very
early and then acquire birth
certificates in those names and so one
of the agents in DC found Jack Barsky
who was born in 1944 and passed away in
1953 and so a kid yeah a kid who died
and they know that that they can use
that identity yes it's also amazing to
think of their KGB spies hanging out
living in DC already I mean I don't want
to be naive but it's it's an amazing
thing when you think that those people
were here well they're still here
they're just no FSB and SVR and yeah
yeah that that has not changed anyway so
he acquired the birth certificate and so
now we worked on a
our story because I would enter the
United States at the age of like 30 or
so what have I done up to that point you
know it's six pages worth of like you
know so they gave you a fake background
well this is this is your pre or what do
they call it I can't think of you Baxter
what what I made up next what I did yes
what I did get from from New York
because people were running around
taking pictures of a factory for
instance that was in ruins where it
could have worked schools where I could
have gone to school but everything else
pretty much was my own fiction you came
up with it yeah
yeah sure no mister you came up with a a
plausible backstory claiming that you
grew up in America right and so where
did you grow up in America according to
the backstory I was born in Orange New
Jersey and then my when my father passed
away I was I was just two years old we
killed him off right away yeah and then
my mother moved to New York and I grew
up in New York City where in New York
City Upper Manhattan I was just gonna
say because that's where the Germans
said that's where Henry Kissinger grew
up yeah there was German you know their
little oasis of ethnic groups and that
sounds quite plausible so you grew up in
you know Inman or whatever that area
right okay so this is your backstory and
you have to memorize this and and sure
by the way I never I never used any of
it other than that my mother's my mother
was German and I grew up speaking German
everything else I didn't need but you
didn't but you had to have it just in
case just in case okay so you know
you're gonna be sent to America I mean
at some point you realize this is my
future once once I I made the move to
Moscow to learn English to perfection
quote unquote perfection and it was
clear that the target had changed from
West Germany to the United States and
did you have a choice in this oh I loved
it oh you love absolutely okay
absolutely you get that was enemy number
one you know that's a bigger task okay
you know I I had I wasn't very much
interested in West Germany I would have
easily gone to Italy or France or even
England but America that was there was a
yeah the big one yeah and also the irony
that you're trapped and now you get to
escape legally right get to go someplace
without yeah okay so at what point so
what is your job in other words before
they send you in 1978 behind enemy lines
what what is your job what are you
thinking you're going to be sent to do
what's the point of where you're going
well I was trained to do political
espionage in other words what what they
thought they wanted me to do was to get
to know decision-makers and foreign
policy or influencers okay we're gonna
go to another break folks this is what a
story the book is deep undercover Jack
Barsky
and this is the Eric Metaxas show do not
go away Barsky an amazing story the book
is deep undercover my secret life
entangled allegiances as a KGB spy in
America so it's 1978 and they are going
to send you across the ocean to Canada
first and your plan is to end up in
Washington DC so how do how do they make
this transition I need to correct to two
things Canada was a practice trip I
returned to Moscow ah and about several
months after I was launched to the
United States directly indirectly
through Yugoslavia
Austria Italy Mexico into Chicago and
from Chicago to New York and and and
that was where was going to operate in
New York City Romney you're not in DC
Wow so why would they have taken such a
circuitous route to bring you I mean to
go from Mexico for all the way you know
it's Mexico and I mean what's the what's
the point of that to cover the trace you
know you can't follow me back into into
Moscow and every new country that I
entered I I have received another
passport with a different name so you
could not possibly trace me back to
Moscow that that was yeah and it was
super super super cautious but I never
never once in my 10 years made a direct
trip between the Soviet Union and the
United States there wasn't no no okay so
you you end up finally you end up in New
York right and where do you settle in
New York well initially I had nothing I
had the birth certificate right so with
that you don't go very far even in those
days you need some ID so the only place
I could possibly stay was in one of
those hotels where you pay by the month
it wasn't very nice there was a lot of
shady characters but not that you're
Shady
no I Russian spy but it's interesting I
would have I would thought that the KGB
could supply you with this stuff but
you're sort of on your own
you got absolutely no III was completely
on my own or was come I was given
instructions and a task but nobody
checked on me nobody gave me any any
help there were no meetings there was I
was on my own I was deep undercover
that's that's that's why the book is
titled
correct ever so my first tip my first
task was and they gave me about two
years to acquire genuine American
documentation primarily primarily a
driver's license and what was really
important a Social Security card so he
can get his get a real job
and I got that in my first job I worked
as a bike messenger in Manhattan I
couldn't take my resume without hitting
yeah how old were you at that time I was
when when I started as a bike messenger
I was 29
in 1978 you're driving around Manhattan
as a bike messenger so knee nine that's
correct and I was one of the best yeah
okay wonderful all right so you you work
your way up obviously but I mean this is
just crazy that here you are do you have
any friends were you able to make
friends well initially no you know until
I had a real job I stayed away from
people I had to you know because first
thing they ask you so what do you do for
a living oh I'm unemployed oh you yeah
no so it was a lonely existence for a
good year a little over a year and even
as a bike messenger you know you got to
be really careful the I didn't fit the
profile you know it's very hard to hide
all German well it's hard to hide you
intellect so initially I didn't make a
lot of friends but I went back to
college I went to study at Baruch
College and that's when I you know
collected a lot of friends all younger
than me but ya know Wow can I taste all
the girls okay
none of them haha well I think you're
married now aren't you so you eventually
you got one but not on that side of the
divide all right so you're undercover
you're you're working it what happens
what's the first what's the first thing
that has to do well the most important
thing and that I was never explicitly
told but the most important thing for
them was that the fact that I was here I
lived here as a bona fide American that
means I was able to do things that the
diplomat spies couldn't do they had
restrictions as far as how far they
could travel out outside of DC and New
York for instance one time I had a task
to to go check on a person in California
whoo I didn't know who he was I was
given a name and they asked me well
check if he's still there and you know
what's address and phone number and so
forth well he was a a a person who had
defected from the KGB and was honored
that death sentence
he died from natural causes but you know
this kind of stuff did he actually die
from that yes yes he did but he defected
from the KGB in California no no he
defected
I don't know when there was a long time
ago he he defected in West Germany and
then it was today somebody actually
tried to kill him there he escaped and
then he was expelled to it traded into
the United States and and was teaching
he was teaching actually at the
University of California in San
Bernardino whom I forgot his name just
now well but anyway so I I was able to
do things like that yeah god forbid they
they were preparing for a situation when
diplomatic relations would be cut off
completely you know and all the
personnel and half half the UN personnel
that they had here I have two embassy
they were all KGB they will all be gone
who was left there were ten of us that
they sent and that's that's information
that was actually obtained from the KGB
archives ten illegals that they sent out
and that was the most important value
that they still had somebody here number
one number two I was supposed to you
know get close to you know those
decision-makers and foreign policy that
was a problem because my standing in
society was not such that you can just
you know go up to Columbia University
and and hang out with people who operate
in the in the Institute for Foreign
Relations there all right that didn't
work I did not succeed in that right so
what did you do that you came over in 78
you're a bike messenger in 79 at what
point I mean your story gets really
crazy and we should probably lead to
that cuz I want to make sure you get to
tell the story but when you decide to
leave my red dot and the whole thing's
right let's I got it I got it just throw
one other thing and this is really crazy
because I told you I went back to
college and my ambition ran away with
me and I graduated as valedictorian
oh stop at Beru yes Oh a KGB spy is the
valedictorian at Peru
I got a graduation speech wait year what
year it was in 1984 oh my god
at the felt forum you know you know the
reason this is funny is that I have to
think that you are even though
technically you are a KGB agent you are
also living as an American and it had to
have an effect of course around it so
what happened then you begin to see the
upside of freedom somewhat I think when
it hit me that the capital capitalism is
not such a bad thing as when I had my
first job as a professional I worked I
started working at MetLife as a computer
programmer and the people were all nice
and we got free lunch and they paid me
well and the work was good and my
colleagues were nice so you know I was
wondering what happened to the evil
insurance companies that we were you
know told that you heard about yeah yeah
so so I got to a point where I developed
sort of a neutral stance you know in
between maybe we can mix it together you
know get a little better economically
and get but get more freedom in the East
yeah and there was a there was a strand
in the in this social democrat movement
in europe they they they called they had
came up with that theory were called
convergence theory and i sort of bought
into it but I was still loyal to my
employer
I had no in I had no plans to defect I
had no plans to know this is in the book
that were that you were the
valedictorian yes yeah this is hilarious
this is absolutely hilarious okay so
what happens after that when do you when
do you start when you get into trouble
okay so I and I started working at
MetLife yeah I worked for four years I
had my career was going really well I
was making good money but something else
happened you
I was still a young man and you know you
you can't live in society and pretend to
be one of them and not do things other
people do and you know there's
biological urges so I was looking for
girlfriends and one of them was really
really really safe I thought because she
was from South America from Guyana and
so she wouldn't have figured out that
something was not quite right with me uh
she didn't have a lot of education she
didn't know how how the United States
worked really well but one day she came
to me and says hey would you have a
problem if I get married to another guy
says what the heck you're talking about
and then she confided well I'm really
illegal here I need to marry somebody to
become legal and clearly that was an
indirect question - yeah in other words
I'll marry you I'll give you first dibs
Charlie hey we'll be right back talking
to Jack Barsky the book is deep
undercover what a story yeah yeah keep
that in mind Frank hey folks to see Eric
Metaxas show I'm talking to Jack Barsky
former KGB agent the book is deep
undercover okay so you fall in love with
this woman she's from Guyana she tells
you I need I'm not legal and I need to
get married
and she's willing to marry another guy
but she's giving you first dibs what
happened so that she did and you know at
that point I I was so convinced that I
was invulnerable that I could take the
risk and take an illegal and make her
legal because I got I had valid
documentation and so and I and I did
some research you know you know how did
how that works with i ns and then
something else happened and this this
was matey the interview you had to show
up for an interview
made the interview real easy she got
pregnant and when we showed up for the
interview
she was already visibly pregnant and the
interview was not at all hostile it
wasn't about you know describe you know
what your bedroom looks like and we were
prepared for all of this you know I was
a trained agent I
I knew what to anticipate none of this
was necessary so she became legal really
legal being made legal by an illegal ha
sounds like chain migration alright so
you you're now married I'm now married
you have a child a child is born and my
plan was still you know I have to go
back because here's the other thing that
that I haven't talked about yet I was
actually married in Germany wait now
wait a minute went you know what it just
figures Albin you're talking to a spy
they keep stuff from you I thought I
thought we were friends
Jack you when you say you were married
in Germany right I'm now I'm really
confused
when in the world did you get married in
Germany I got married in Germany when I
came back from the Soviet Union I had
this girlfriend who I absolutely loved
but not enough to say goodbye to the KGB
so when when I departed for Moscow I
broke up with her and then when I came
back for a little while she found me and
the love was rekindled at that point I
spoke with KGB folks and they allowed me
to marry her initially they thought they
could send her with me but she
psychologically she wasn't capable to
him so you're living in America of an
American unmarried woman in Germany and
I have a son and in Germany have a son
in Germany but do you ever see your wife
every two years oh excuse me but what
kind of a life is that that's very
strange she was willing to marry he was
even though you're not gonna be together
yes Jack you're a nice guy but you're
not that nice what I was much better
looking I mean what what a crazy thing
so now you're in America and now you're
a bigamist yes you're cheating on your
wife and then you decide to make it
legal and you marry this woman now
you're married to two women or this is
getting very confused mitigating
circumstances I was a big ernest with
with a split personality i had
had really to two individuals in here
and they didn't communicate very much
yeah that doesn't legally I was still at
being a meso obviously yeah but I mean
it's if you're living you know it's like
when somebody's spouse dies or something
you don't see them for years and they
remarry and then suddenly the person
shows up it's like I didn't die you know
it these kinds of things happen it's a
strange thing to live all by yourself in
a country I meet this woman you fall in
love I mean I can only imagine how
strange it would have been for you so
what what do you do now what happens
well what happens now you know it says
so now I have a child here and I have a
child there but I was I clearly was was
going back home joined my German family
then that was the plan
that was your plan that was the plan so
it's a year and a half my after my
daughter is born it's in in early
December of 1988 and that's your
daughter here in America my American
daughter is now 18 months old the
prettiest thing
you know big big eyes curly hair started
talking already I was in love with this
child more so than with any other person
in my entire life that is the first time
that I felt unconditional love towards
somebody now hit me by surprise I was
not prepared for that because yes this I
saw this girl grow up from you know
being a small baby to eventually hate
any standing there anybody who's had a
kid especially a father with a daughter
yes it's like going from seeing in
black-and-white to seeing in color you
think hey what is this color stuff
that's a completely different universe
you understand their own flesh and
bloods a beautiful thing
yes and so and this is when when the
crisis came very suddenly I had to tell
the KGB which way I would go to work
every day and we had arranged for a
signal spot there so if I don't have to
you know wander around someplace else
just by just going to work I would check
this one spot see if there's a signal
could be a call for a meeting or what do
you mean a signal what can signal it
would
and in this case they were graphical
signals we'd we decided to make dots
with with paint okay so a little dot
tells you what well a little dot could
be a yellow dot would have been come to
a meeting another one would be we
confirming the deaddrop operation the
red one was danger
get out and it wasn't little it was the
size of a fist okay somebody go painting
this and where was this painted on the
subway plats the the subway and Queen
sets the a train ran elevated runs
elevated for quite a while yeah and it
was on one of those posts that supports
to the tracks which station Sunnyside
eightieth and Hudson ah different okay
so one morning you know it's it's early
I go to work I'm gonna half asleep and
all of a sudden I see this red dot
screaming at me okay we're gonna have to
we're going to a break I think all right
we're gonna be right back this is called
the cliffhanger in show business folks
don't don't leave the taxi show talking
to Jack Barsky deep undercover is the
book okay Jack you are it's around 1988
you have a daughter
18 months old you're in love with your
daughter you're married here you're I
mean it's crazy and then one day you
show up and you see one of these big red
dots which tells you danger what what
what that said according to protocol I
was supposed to not turn around not go
back to my apartment
just make a beeline to a place where I
had hidden some reserved documents there
was a Canadian driver's license make a
beeline to Canada and and say hello at
the Soviet embassy and get out
that was it holy so this was I there was
no other information other than do that
because except now I mean leave your
whitey and child child I ignore the dog
I went I went numb right
this was decision time and and I you
know first of all you're on your way to
work right I'm on my way so when you are
you go to work you're numb because
you're thinking now what now what now
way and I sit there in front of the
computer monitor completely incapable of
doing anything what did you think it
would be knows why would they give you
such a dramatic thing I mean what did
you think was happening well eventually
they explained that they thought somehow
may have been somebody who who had
betrayed me so you're about to get
pinched yes and and they actually I
ignored this so but they didn't know I
could have been in a hospital they
didn't know what what happened so now
they sending me the same information
they send me more information through
the Morse code shortwave and it says you
got to get out because you your cover is
probably blown okay okay so I still
played for time they still didn't know I
could have been in a hospital you know
they didn't come check on me yeah do you
don't do that yeah but eventually they
did the most radical thing that they
could have done one morning I was
standing on the subway platform there's
somebody coming in from the right short
guy in a in a black coat and he comes
really close to me and whispers into my
right ear you got to come home or else
you're dead and then he walked away so
now they knew that I knew that they know
so everybody knew it was absolutely
decision time and I closed my eyes and
as I gotta stay what I did then I went
home that there's coming weekend because
this guy I composed a letter and secret
writing it took some time didn't to do
that and I told him that you know I'm
not I'm not coming home because I have
contracted HIV AIDS and the United
States the only place where I can get
treatment I will not defect I will not
betray you really an alibi it was yak
way to go brilliant thought good because
you're not that bright I know you that's
amazing
no seriously that's brilliant thing but
what do
you do I mean okay so you leave this
note and you're assuming that somebody's
gonna come to your apartment and find
the note no no this is a letter in
secret writing you you consent sent to
where to an address someplace in South
America
oh where the person is cooperating with
the cage okay so you send this note but
what is a Moscow but what is your plan
so your plan is to stay where you are
yeah and we keep working where you work
exactly so you know they can get to you
dig and there was a concern that they
might because I didn't know whether they
would believe the lie but they did I
found out much later they actually went
to my German family and told him that I
had passed away AIDS was a death
sentence and in those years but for
about three months I was you know
concerned that they might come after me
I was also concerned that the FBI would
find me but then anyway was the sitting
duck I'm just one thing I made sure that
I was not predictably at a certain place
at a certain time ever
so when didn't you have to show up for
work every day yeah I went to work but I
went different routes at different times
and so forth and and I I dialed into the
radio frequency where where I got my my
transmissions and it was always on a
Thursday night and one Thursday night
and was silence that is when I knew we I
was not KGB anymore
that's when I went and through the radio
in the Hudson River and slowly
decompressed and know that I would so
they let you go they let me go because
you know I was dead wanted somebody with
AIDS in the Soviet Union right amazing
so it worked it worked well okay so now
you're married you have a daughter
you're madly in love with you're in
America and now what you decide to live
that life yes now I'm now I'm now
concentrating on my career oh by the way
I started a 401k yeah makes sense right
now you're really American okay so when
I bought a house and you bought a house
where about 60 miles north of New York
and in Washington Ville okay so
as far as you're concerned it's over
yeah you're free my end and and I would
never see Germany again but you know I
live out my life as a middle class upper
middle class American and then one day
about nine years later on I'm driving
towards home at that point I had a house
in Pennsylvania and crossed a hot the
Delaware River at the toll gates a state
trooper waving me over and said could
you please move over there it's a
routine traffic stop and I stopped like
and then the officer says please get out
of the car get out of the car and then I
see somebody coming from behind and I
turn around and he opens his credentials
the flap says FBI we would like to talk
with you
boom hello my old life was right back
yeah like like an avalanche yeah and the
fellow who I'm now good friends with
told me that I went white as the driven
snow at that point you know what's gonna
happen to me now well they took me to a
motel and interrogated me for a couple
of hours and then they let me go now
interestingly enough you know I sense of
humor just didn't leave me they took me
into a car why did I and and the partner
of the agent who had addressed me first
you know he was sitting there and I saw
a gun sticking to to his ankle I knew
this was real right yeah but within a
minute I had caught myself and I asked
him so what took you so long break the
ice yeah and then then the other agent
turned around and he said you know this
may not be the worst day in your life
there was a glimmer of hope
yeah and eventually after you know two
months of debriefing and passing a
lie-detector test the head of the FBI
Louis Freeh decided I'd be much more
valuable here oh yeah absolutely that's
we're gonna be right back talking final
segment with the author of deep
undercover
you
[Music]
yes I know
hey dr. Jack Barsky last few minutes
Jack your story I mean my gosh it goes
on and on people have to read the book
deep undercover but you said you're a
free man Louis Freeh no pun intended
who says you know we want we prefer to
work with you because you have all this
information so you give your information
at this point to the CIA and you have no
sense of guilt about this no the one
thing that helped a lot I had no names I
couldn't give anybody away right names
were kept from me let's say you didn't
feel the conspiracy yeah correct but I
you know I other than that I sang as
much as I could sing because you
believed in America at that point at
this point yes leave damn it that's an
amazing you know why because it was
after the wall came down
and the internet became available and I
did research and I was completely
relieved from my communist notion for
illusion these are these delusions
correct okay and it's a crazy thing so
the woman that you married are you
married to her today no I'm not so we we
spent good 20 plus years together I was
able to raise my daughter she she played
Division 1 basketball it was it was a
great life I had we had another son and
then when my daughter moved out and my
son was about to move out I I just like
there was an emotional crisis that I
didn't anticipate I had nothing left to
look for you know the the relationship
with my wife and me wasn't that great it
was wasn't on a solid foundation and you
know I I wrote a poem I called it
loneliness I felt lonely really lonely
for the first time in well you never had
faith no I had none
I had no spiritual spirituality in any
way shape and form and what point we've
just got like a minute well a point did
that change I know we yeah changed in
that very moment I had hired myself in
an administrative system I was a CIO and
he was a hardcore Christian and she
opened the door for me and the other
fellow the other person who was really
really important in this was dr.
Zacharias Ravi Zacharias every Zacharias
who you interviewed he was just here who
in his radio program convinced me you
don't have to be a dummy to believe in
Jesus yes it helps but you don't have to
be so you became a Christian what year
was this that was so you became who
thought that an atheist KGB agent would
become a pro-american
Christian and I speak in churches no and
you speak in churches good side dunk
what a story
I mean honestly it's so beautiful I I
really I wanted to have you on Jack
because your story is everybody's story
how do you discover the truth what is
the path so many people are in so many
different places people listening to
this program right now could be in a
completely different place but you know
reality has a way of getting to us and
it took some time with you mm-hmm
but you saw the other side and here we
are and you have to have the courage to
face it because that is the only thing
that eventually can result in a
satisfactory outcome yeah
well God invented reality and he's on
the side of reality so we really need to
get with reality I'm sorry we're at a
time but what a joy Jack to have you
back the book folks is deep undercover
my secret life and tangled allegiances
as a KGB spy in America Jack thank you
so much welcome hey folks is here
metaxas show hey Alvin yeah we keep
talking about
what the grand prize is yeah we're doing
a food for the poor fundraiser folks and
we need you to participate so in order
to lure you into participating we are
saying any amount you give it could be
ten dollars it doesn't it doesn't matter
what the amount is any amount you give
no there could be kids listening at home
maybe you want to steal ten dollars
maybe you know there's a purse you know
there's ten des if you give ten dollars
okay I won't tell you stole it the point
is it doesn't matter what you give
whatever you give you're entered in a
grand prize drawing Alban the grand
prize drawing is so grand I mean what
grand really doesn't do it justice
though we have fun we keep adding to it
because we keep thinking of fun things
we can put into things we got stick in
the putt now we're given away signed
copies of like I've written like a
thousand books and I have half of them
you're gonna get signed by me
you got t-shirts you got Eric Metaxas
show has oh my these are handsome you
that's oh my very and then we've got
these beautiful mugs these are the most
beautiful mugs we've ever produced for
the show yep they are so they're so
heavy
what is oak cuz it's filled with water
but these are beautiful mugs I'm not
like the cheap mugs normally you would
get right we've got all this beautiful
stuff but we're gonna sweeten the pot oh
yeah one more time now we do fun facts
Fridays every once in a while and a lot
of the fun false facts are based on some
of the things that you have written in
your don't you believe it oh yeah and
some are from beyond belief BS Bentley's
beyond belief somehow that's real bad in
that you wrote yes and that's what I
wrote and of course it's a published
book from nineteen eighty four or five I
can't even by the way when I found out
that you wrote this book I just flipped
because I said he's it possible that my
producer wrote a book just like one that
I wrote like what are the odds of that I
know that we're both sick in the same
way mentally sick in the senior
children's author and so am i from Simon
& Schuster the hamster Holmes Holmes
series yeah now there's a brand new one
coming out in October but I'm gonna
throw in this from earlier this year
this is hamster Holmes a bit stumped
they're gonna be six in the series by
the end of the year that's me a box set
next summer who publishes these buses
Simon and Schuster the Simon issues you
know
you have this side job because you're
minting money off of these handsome
homes here it is and it's incredible
yeah okay so you can sign these books I
will sign them okay because if not I'm
willing to sign them I'll sign anything
and sign them what the heck but we're
saying all this because we're truck
we're just trying to get yeah we are
it's so serious
anything for the poor it off it couldn't
be more serious I have to joke because
it's so painful when you think about
where we're talking about kids that have
no food we're talking about mothers that
have no kit food to give their kids it's
painful stuff this is happening now
because Venezuela of course has
unravelled people are escaping the hell
of that former country they're now in
Colombia South America and I want to say
that if we don't help them the food for
the poor doesn't help them they're not
getting any help okay this is not like
the United States of America where there
are social services so in these
countries we have to go to them out of
the goodness of our hearts and so food
for the poor is there but they need your
money to help them so we're asking you
just go to our website Metaxas talk comm
you can go there right now you'll see
the banner anything you give folks it
doesn't matter we'll enter you in this
contest and then there's all kinds of
other prizes and things but I want to
say that food for the poor what they do
is is amazing and well you can read
about it at Metaxas talk.com
you can read about it and you can give
what you want to give there but any
amount you give your enter to win this
drawing of all these books but you can
also call and I to people right now
there's a phone just pick up the phone
and call eight four four eight six three
hope I really I'm asking you folks just
pick up the phone I don't care what you
give gives twenty dollars anything you
give I will enter in the contest and
it's badly needed ok it's tax-deductible
it's needed eight four four eight six
three Hope eight four four eight six
three hope we're gonna keep talking
about this till the end of the month we
need your help desperately eight four
four eight six three hope thank you and
God bless you as you give